David, Samuel, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Thank you very much for having me.
Thank you for having me.
Yeah, good to have you, David.
And Samuel, it's always good to have you back on the show.
So we're going to talk about Rust, some really cool experiences that David had
building a linter that works on a ridiculous number of different projects and packages.
And Samuel, Rust is obviously core to Pydantic.
And I want to talk a bit about Pydantic and how you guys have used Rust as well.
Should be a good time.
Yeah, looking forward to it.
Yeah, thanks for having me on.
I've been listening to this podcast for years.
Oh, wonderful.
It's a little like open source.
You get to help create it, you know?
Exactly.
All right, let's do quick introductions.
I know, Samuel, you almost don't need introductions.
Pytantic is so popular.
However, I'm sure there's a couple people out there.
You know, you have, before I let you introduce yourself and stuff just a tiny, just quickly,
you have the honor, distinguished or maybe otherwise, of actually participating in the
loudest Talk Python episode ever.
Do you remember that forklift that was driving around behind us last?
It was dystopian, wasn't it?
End of PyCon two years ago, and we started doing the podcast,
and then they started taking down the PyCon around us,
and there was this forklift.
It felt like slight jeopardy, but it was good.
It certainly was a concentration test to have the forklift
driving right behind us, beeping as loud as I could.
All right, tell people about yourself and Pydantic and stuff.
Yeah, so I started Pydantic back in 2017
as a side project.
It like toodled along
and then 2021,
it somehow,
something happened
and the rate of downloads
just started to increase a lot.
Started working on it full time
in 2022,
decided to do this rebuild
of the core in Rust
because while I was really proud
of how much people
were using Pylantic,
I wasn't particularly proud
of its internals.
I had done a bit of Rust,
a bit of a couple of other
projects that wrap Rust
to produce Python packages,
but nothing on the scale of Pydantic.
And then eight months into this three-month project,
I was halfway through,
and Sequoia very kindly got in touch and offered to invest,
and so I started a company around Pydantic.
And so, yeah, we released Pydantic V2,
the rewrite, middle of last year.
And, yeah, adoption of Pydantic, as I am pleased to say,
continued to grow.
We had, I think, 307 million downloads in October,
And now we're obviously building commercial stuff, Logfire in particular, but we also do a bit more Rust in Python.
So we have Jitter, which is our very fast Rust-based JSON parser, which is available both, is used in Pynastic and is a separate package.
So yeah, that's a kind of summary of my interaction with Rust and Python over the last kind of five, six years.
Amazing.
Yeah, and it was that move, that pending move or partial move to Rust that actually was the basis of that forklift episode.
David, hello.
Hi.
Yeah, so I am based in London, like Samuel.
I work on a product called Kraken.
That is not anything to do with cryptocurrency or gin.
I think there's a gin.
or get clients um it's actually um it came out of a company called octopus energy um and it's uh
octopus energy is a renewable energy company and kraken is basically a big django monolith that we
used at octopus energy and it worked really well and octopus energy over the about the last eight
years has grown to be the second biggest energy company in the uk um and so what we've been doing
is using kraken throughout the world on lots of different in lots of different countries and lots
of different energy companies i think the interesting thing about it is it's absolutely
massive um it's i just counted it today eight and a half million lines of code for one that is nuts i
i was going to have you elaborate because you said i work on a large django monolith like
it's really large that's amazing has there ever been a bigger one i don't know you should
probably ask on hacker news or something um yeah GitHub knows it's it's big and it's also um there's
quite a lot of people working on it at once there's like i just looked at last last week there were
over 400 authors at the pull request in one week all merging stuff together onto the same python
package and you'd think it wouldn't work uh i would have said it wouldn't work but it turns out
actually you can run an energy company on that basis you know you're a huge energy company you
must have a ton of repositories yeah we got one there are some others to be honest but um yeah
mostly mostly it's one can i ask a question that's i would is that continuously deployed or how is
that managed in terms of deploys um so actually each energy company there are there are nearly
30 energy companies each energy company gets their own separate installation um and every time anyone
merges pretty much uh we push it out to all of all of the energy companies um you know it's on the
If we break something, then we can fix it quickly as well.
And also in the domain of energy,
how often do you actually log in to your energy account?
Are you going to be on the phone saying, where's my bill?
So, you know, we can get away with that kind of thing,
which maybe we couldn't do that if it was, I don't know,
a payments gateway or something like that.
Or if you built a package that shipped over PyPI
to hundreds of millions of people.
Yeah, well, we released Pydantic 2.10 yesterday,
and we've definitely got quite a few issues back.
So we definitely break stuff too.
Don't, for a second, think we don't break anything.
We don't mind the things that are unintentionally broken
because we can go and fix them.
It's when we change an API,
that's the painful thing for us rather than actually.
But weirdly, bugs are in some sense less severe than getting the wrong API.
Yeah, that's got to be really tricky to say, we need to add a parameter to this function.
Or the whole one to two switch, you deprecated quite a few methods and stuff as well.
Right.
And in some sense, deprecating methods and the parameters are relatively easy because
someone is relatively clear to see what's happened.
is like subtle changes in behavior.
Like, do you apply an integer constraint
before or after a function that wraps the integer validation?
Like things like that, if you decide to change it
because you're like, wow, this is marginally more correct.
Is it worth making marginally more correct
for a lot of people spending a lot of time very confused?
- Oh yeah, that can definitely generate
some open issues on the issue tracker.
also the parsing.
I think you all changed the rules about the parsing, right?
One of the pieces of magic of Pydantic is if you had a list
and you said it was a list of integers,
but it happened to be strings that could be converted to integers,
it would just become a list of integers.
But I feel like you changed the strictness
or looseness of that behavior at one point, right?
Yeah, we made it a little bit more strict in places.
We said things like you can't coerce an integer to a string
because basically the original semantics of Pynantic was like,
we'll just call integer on the thing and see if it's an int.
And that mostly worked.
We'll call list on something and see if it's a list.
Problem is with string, you can call string on everything
and then you'll get back a string, right?
So it's no longer a valid test of is it a string to call string on it.
Right, right.
What time did this happen?
It happened at angle bracket class datetime dot datetime dot.
Yeah, right, exactly.
So yeah, and that's another thing
No one writes their unit tests for the weird edge cases of what's valid.
But then if you're a bank and one bank is sending you strings for a number or numbers
for a string and you change it, like we change how it works, that is that's problematic.
But luckily the banks don't pay us anything in sponsorship.
So I don't mind breaking it for banks as a rule.
Well, you see, these are the bootstrapped struggling small businesses.
They're not ready, these banks, to have enough money to support open source.
We're just trying to persuade them to use Logfire right now, so I'll stop being rude about banks.
Yes, no, of course.
Well, it's a really tricky balance, right, to get those folks to open their checkbooks and pay for it, right?
They don't have charity usually in their bylines or whatever, what they're supposed to be doing, right?
But with something like Logfire, they can say, well, here's a service that we can use.
And by using it, we might be able to support Pydantic and the other things that are important to us.
So I think that's great.
Tell people just real quickly about Logfire out there.
Yeah, absolutely.
So Logfire is an observability platform built, obviously, by the team behind Pydantic.
If you go to Logfire along the top, I suppose the two things that make it different from some of the stuff that's come before is Logfire is built on open telemetry.
So on open standards that mean that, yeah, the rails of where the data is being transferred are on an open standard.
And if you decide you didn't want to use the Logfire platform anymore, you can send that data to anything else that supports OpenTelemetry.
But unlike lots of other companies in our space, instead of using OpenTelemetry as an excuse to abandon the SDK space and just say, use the horrible OpenTelemetry SDK directly,
we have the Logfire package, which tries to make that super nice and easy to use.
And then the other big change we have,
I think there'll be an example maybe further on down the page,
but like we, maybe there isn't one right there,
but we allow you to write SQL directly against your data.
Oh, interesting.
Instead of having to use kind of click ops to go around and do surveys.
So if you look here, right, you can go and like write SQL to query your data.
And so although we're still early,
there are things you can do in Logfire that you cannot
and have never been able to do in like one of the big incumbents
because it's just SQL.
And it's obviously much easier to learn for you,
much easier for LLMs to write.
So we have the plausible chance in the future
that you could basically chat with Logfire
and say, what's wrong with my app?
And the agent can go off and run SQL
to investigate things in a way that is much harder
if you have your own dialect.
But to write SQL against data of this scale
is a monumentally difficult challenge
and one of the things we struggle with a lot.
But we think it's useful enough for developers
that we like put the time in.
- So you can write any SQL you want,
except for please only do the ones that have indexes.
- So it's, so our new database is time is data fusion.
So there were no indexes, but yeah, if you do,
there are queries you can do now that just like eat memory
and we have to find ways around them.
And that's actually the hardest bit is like,
whether intentionally or not, there are people,
you know, there are SQL you can write,
which is enormously like heavy to go and compute
So we have to be able to find ways to process that without taking down other customers, I suppose, is the point.
You don't want to do a denial of service on yourself.
Right. I mean, the definition of DOS is that the effort required to DOS is significantly lower than the effort required to process it, right?
And writing SQL is the ultimate example of that.
Yeah, it absolutely is.
- Okay, well that's a really interesting idea
to have SQL there rather than like,
let's just click around our UI until we get an answer
and those sorts of things.
- Yeah, so I think one of the things,
we've got some dashboards on that page,
but the idea is like, sure, we'll go and give you
a nice dashboard for HTTP traffic and like response codes.
I think it's the next one down.
But if you want to go and edit that,
like the point is that you can basically,
next one after that,
it's the point is you can go and customize that
however you like by just editing the SQL if you so wish.
So it's like, it's trying to save with alerts.
So we have, I guess you would say century style alerting,
but again, that's all configurable.
'Cause in the end it's just SQL that you can go and edit.
- Yeah.
Awesome.
Well, congratulations.
I know many people were curious about when they heard that,
Hey, Pydantic starting a company, they have funding.
It's like, what are they gonna exactly gonna do with that?
And maybe a lot of people were worried just,
hey, now it costs money to just use the library, right?
- Right, and I don't think anyone ever thought
it would have been a good idea to literally have like
Pydantic Pro where you have to like have some API key
to install Pydantic, but it could definitely have been,
what most open source companies do is they have like
open source project as a service, and then they start,
if not taking out features, then adding new features
to the paid version.
And I was super keen that Pydantic continued to be successful as an open source project.
And so we did the slightly weird thing about building something, which is in a different space from what we're known for.
And that definitely has its challenges.
But I think it's overall, I think it's the right decision.
Yeah. Awesome.
Well, congratulations.
Beautiful looking service here and so on.
And I think maybe one of the big pieces of news here, and that's not the one, although that is awesome,
That's where we're going.
Is this jitter? What is this jitter?
David, are you familiar with this jitter?
I've heard of it.
Okay. Yeah.
Parsing JSON is super important. Tell us about this.
So parsing JSON is a big thing.
When I first got Pydantic version 2 with the Rust core,
we were using Surve,
which is the default parsing library in Rust.
The problem is that Surdy wants to parse the entire JSON object
before it returns you some representation of that.
And Jitter came out of this idea that we could do parsing as we do validation.
So imagine you have a list of integers.
Instead of what you would traditionally do is you would parse the JSON,
you would allocate some vector of all of the values in that list,
each of which would have to be itself a enum of here are the different types
you might get in JSON because you don't know what it's going to be up front.
And then once you finish doing that, you can then go and do validation on that.
And Jitter, the idea is it's an iterative JSON parser, hence the name.
So you can effectively get, if you think of it in Python parlance,
it's like an iterable that gives you back each individual element of the JSON as you go along.
The truth is right now inside Pydantic core, we're still using this JSON value,
which is Jitter's variant of doing the whole parsing first.
There are a few optimizations that we get to get away with.
So there are some really neat things in JSON.
Like if your strings, for example, John Doe,
you're showing on the screen there,
does not include any escape sequences like backslash N
or Unicode sequences,
then you can pass a pointer to that range
of the underlying JSON object as a string
instead of having to allocate that string.
So we do some clever optimizations like that.
I see.
But the plan in a future version of Pynantic,
either as an opt-in feature in v2 or as v3,
is to be able to do the iterative parsing.
What's crazy about Jitter is,
well, one, once we started work on this,
we've actually got to the point where Jitter is
full-on faster than SIRDI in any use case,
even if you're not doing the iterative thing.
But also, this iterative JSON parsing thing
is exactly what you want when you want to allow people
to query JSON in a way like JSONB in Postgres.
And so we went and used Jitter to implement JSON querying
inside Data Fusion when we moved our database to Data Fusion.
And it was just like very luckily, yeah,
it happens to be exactly the right concept you need
for querying JSON where you want to iterate over
looking for the like string foo
and then stop as soon as you find it.
Awesome.
So the code samples you got on the repo here,
got a lot of semicolons in them.
Is there a...
Is it interoperable with Python as well,
or is it just a Rust?
Yes.
So if you go up, actually,
this is a monorepo.
So if you go up into source,
into crates,
so this is...
You have a bunch of different crates in here,
but if you look at Jitter Python,
this is the...
And I think if you go down,
you'll see an example of calling Jitter directly from Python.
Awesome.
The reason we released this as a Python package was a large AI company, who I don't know if they wanted me to name them, basically were using Pydantic V1 so heavily, but they needed some of the functionality of Jitter.
And so they basically begged us to release this as a separate package so that they could use Jitter themselves before they upgraded to Pydantic V2.
In fact, the OpenAI SDK uses Jitter, so I think that is public information who it might have been.
But yeah, the other interesting thing that came out,
which again, I'm ashamed to say I had no idea would be useful,
this idea of iteratively parsing JSON
until you stop effectively turns out to be incredibly helpful
in LLMs where, as you see on screen here,
you can basically parse an incomplete JSON string.
And obviously because LLMs stream you the response,
you can use this to effectively do validation
as you receive structured responses.
- Right, work on a JSON stream instead of a JSON response.
Yeah.
- So I've been surprised by how like the legs
that this has had, which I wasn't expecting
when we first started it.
But yeah, the nice bit is it's all the input,
the actual JSON parsing is rust,
but then we have the logic to, yeah,
basically access that from Python,
both in this package and in Pydantic core.
- Awesome.
Well, you sent me over to this cargo section,
or the crate section rather.
And looking here, I see the cargo.toml,
pyproject.toml, some source.
I think this might be-- in the source, we've got some rust.
I think that this might be, David,
a good way to start leading into working with rust.
And this is kind of the destination
of your whole presentation you gave at PyCon Italy, right?
- Absolutely, yeah.
So, well, we sort of alluded to it already,
but Python and Rust can interoperate,
which is an amazing fact.
I think it's so easy to think,
oh, well, within a particular application,
you're stuck with the programming language that you've picked.
actually python was really designed originally from what i understand to be a kind of glue language
between different c programs and things like that so actually um what you can do is you can sort of
use that design to use rust to compile uh what are called extension modules um which are used in
lots of other bits of python say numpy or something like that um but but or even
maybe less obvious ones like SQLAlchemy and other places there's optional speedup C extension type
things right yeah absolutely and in the standard library of course but you're not writing C or
you're not writing I think NumPy might even have Fortran you're writing Rust but you're
you're ending up with something that's the same as you might have done with a different
lower level language um and that allows you to use python for all of the nice stuff like
domain modeling and um and you know just that thing that we're all familiar with and the reason we
like python is we can be very productive with it but just occasionally you you hit something with
python where it's it's basically slow um it's it's there's a high level language there and those
abstractions are coming at a cost you know we talk about the GIL as well you know the GIL gets in
the way of using all of the cpus on our machine but that's not the case for extension modules they can
leave the GIL behind if you want so you can actually by writing these extension modules get
more out of python than you might have thought um and rust is a pretty new language that's learned a
lot of lessons from older languages and uh it's i mean i think it's really lovely um it you feel
like you're in the presence of greatness almost well i wanted to ask you i wanted to ask both of
of you this question before we get too far down this path is Python often is referred to as C
Python because the runtime, the core is all built in C, not Python, right? And the original interop
story is around C extensions and CFFI and those kinds of things. So why not just pick C for
Pydantic
or for your linter,
David?
Everyone else is doing it.
They have been doing it.
Good question.
Maybe sometimes it would be the right answer,
but Rust is
offering something very
different. It's offering a really
nice developer
ecosystem.
All the tooling is
brilliant.
Also, I think
security is a big thing.
So many security problems come from mismanagement of pointers.
Rust is designed so that the compiler won't let you make
a certain kind of mistake that happens all over the place.
Yeah, I put it more simply than that.
I'm not clever enough to write C safely.
That's a void pointer pointer. What are we doing here?
One good way of looking at it is that you can have the unsafe mode in Rust where you effectively lose those constraints.
And sometimes there are the occasional place where you need to use it.
When we do that inside Pydantic Core, myself or David Hewitt, who's a much better Rust developer than I am, we agonize for genuinely minutes at a time over how exact, whether or not it is really safe to write that one line of code as unsafe and whether there is any possible case in which it could lead to problems.
If you write an app in C, every single line is unsafe.
And if you write a...
You're agonizing even over just a string, like an S print F equivalent.
Yeah, and it doesn't have to be 8.5 million lines of code for it to be incredibly hard to go through every single line of that.
So I forget there's like 40,000 lines of code in Pynantic Core.
It is inconceivable that we could have written that in C and have anywhere near the confidence we have with it written in Rust that it was memory safe.
we have had one memory safety issue reported in Pydantic Core and it is it was a side effect of
something deep in PyO3 which in turn was the was a result of like Greenlit doing something crazy
that technically the guild didn't think you could do I mean that was the that's the level of
complexity we have another example is so Jitter which I showed you we released Jitter a year ago
now it is the most downloaded json parser in python other than the one in the standard library
no one has ever reported a bug in it in terms of it parsing stuff incorrectly uh except for in
partial mode i think uh now i said that someone will probably go and find one but like it has been
that just wouldn't happen in python you could not write that reliable um yeah so that's one of the
ways it one of the ways it achieves this is by like really stopping you doing all the stuff that
that you would expect to be able to do.
I always, whenever I sort of tell someone about Rust,
I say, you know, if you have a string in Rust
and you assign it to a variable, say X,
and then you like store that X in Y,
so you do Y equals X, then you can't use X anymore
because it's gone.
And I mean, that seems very strange, you know,
it seems strange maybe as python developers because we don't actually hardly ever maybe never need to
think about memory safety um you know we've got that luxury but once you go down lower level
uh you are starting to and and what's going on there with the kind of you can't have x and y both
pointing to that string um i mean you can if you copy that memory so that there's then separate
bits of memory in x and y but it's kind of making you think in detail about where is the memory for
this program whereas python just yeah and ownership right the ownership of who owns this
i can give you another good practical example so i was saying earlier in the in the jitter case
we have this point where some strings you can many strings you can instead of having to copy
the whole of the string out of the chunk of data within the original input of JSON, you can literally
refer to that slice of data as a pointer, literally say this is the string itself, and you go up to copy.
But that means the type you get back for when you parse a string in Jitter is what is called a cow
in Rust, and it is either an owned string, e.g. when you've copied it, or it's a reference to the
difficult when you're actually writing code with that because you can't go and access that string
after you've validated after you've passed the next token because in theory that could have now
changed if you were writing that in c you'd have to basically manually keep track of am i
accessing that cow in the right place whereas in rust well you wouldn't have a cow in c but you
could presumably have some similar construct rust basically takes care of that as soon as you go and
do another piece of validation it immediately says no no you can't even access that previous cow because
of it has now been used when you've called into the parser to get the next token. And so it's a
very neat, it basically stops you from having to think about that. And that means you can actually
do not more unsafe, but more complex things knowing that the borrower checker is going to save you in
the end. You can try and do something and if it doesn't work, the borrower checker will say it's
not possible. And if the borrower checker says it is possible, you're safe to access that reference
to a string that you passed like 50 lines of code higher up.
Yeah.
That sounds like a paradigm shift, but also super valuable.
So I know primarily Python people are listening,
so this word might not make any sense,
but is this a compile time check or is this a runtime check?
We don't really think about compiling much in Python.
Right.
We don't think about it, but you can think of import time
when you do different stuff,
or you think about static typing when you go and run
Pyright over your code and that is like very similar in some ways to compile time
um it's also one of the big disadvantages of rust i mean people think rust is faster than python
in many cases if you write your script it's a lot faster to run it in python than it is in rust
because it'll take two seconds to run in rust or in python or a few hundred milliseconds to run in
python and 10 seconds to compile in rust so yeah uh it is not universally the case that getting the
the late like yeah the development cycle is faster it depends how many times you run the code right
if you're going to run it once or twice yeah and you've got to create it to run it well you know
it maybe took you 10 minutes versus 20 minutes and it's another of the great powers of of the
python ecosystem and of pipe i that we the maintainers of of python packages built in rust
can take care of compiling that Rust once, distribute all of the binaries.
And then when people go and install it, we don't have to compile it.
If you were using most other, if you were using Cargo, you would have to take care.
I mean, putting the controversy over Surdi to one side for a minute,
you would have to take care of compiling that code yourself every time you wanted to go and use it.
Whereas actually PyPI does an amazing job of distributing compiled Rust for virtually every ecosystem,
at every architecture and it's just working when you install it.
Yeah, absolutely.
Something I just wanted to say about the memory management,
it is a compile time, but actually you can also use reference counting
and things like that.
It's just opt-in.
So there are lots of tools for allowing you to do runtime checking of things.
And sometimes that's what you have to do.
like oh i can't really do this just using stuff that's worked out before the program even runs
i do need to do it at runtime but it's fine i i can do that for this particular data type and
and there's an api to do it and it will come with other trade-offs um but you know it's it's giving
you that control but it's giving you control over things which if you've only ever programmed in
python which to be honest pretty much i mean i used to do php a bit but you know i'm my mind is
soaked up in Python and coming to Rust, it's like, oh, this is a completely different way
of thinking.
It's like the red pill in the matrix.
You're like, what is this?
Yeah.
It's nice though.
It's hard though, I'm not going to lie.
I feel very confused a lot of the time.
I suppose this is a time for the obligatory, the White House recommends the future software
should be written in memory stuff languages such as rust and python so right that's always um
nice to have around to think about whether or not that's an argument in favor of rust or not
depending on your take on a particular white house is another question altogether but well
you know what i i will draw your attention to the date of this it's gotten more new leadership
recommends yeah next year we'll see if they're like assembly all the way we've decided no okay
all right let's let's carry on with your your story david so you you wrote this thing called
an import linter which is kind of a unique there's lots of linters in python right there's
pyflake there's rough another rust success story i suppose but this one checks more architecturally
right you want to use this on your your small little repo that you all are running over there
tell us about that story yeah i mean i i wrote it i wrote it for kraken but actually i had the idea
for it in a previous um company on you know it was still a complex monolith but nowhere near as big
and to be honest i find even in quite quite small projects with just a handful of files
it's still useful um to think about the architecture of those files and i think
for me architecture is ultimately about dependencies and something that python lets you do
which i don't think is very good is that you can end up with lots of uh cross dependencies between
different modules and packages within a particular python project so for example you know i mean we
know that sometimes you get circular import errors but this is something a bit wider than that like
possibly if you've got two sibling sub packages you might have one module which imports from
something in one in the other sibling package and then there'd be like another modules that import
the other way and it it won't stop python from loading up but there's a there's a sort of
there's a circular dependency conceptually between those two packages they're tightly coupled
yeah and yeah this is just one example of the kind of architectural rule you might want to
impose on a project to say well actually i i want there to be a dependency only one way i want one
of those packages to be kind of lower level and one of them to be higher level whatever um or maybe
you'd have like five packages that are all siblings and you know i call this layer really but where
you maybe you know say yeah this can import all the ones below it but nothing can import the ones
above it you sort of think of them in a sort of stack of yeah um and so the details here's the
public interface and then things use the public interface they shouldn't reach down below and
and vice versa that's certainly one thing you can do with it um uh but it's it's mostly focused on
controlling dependencies between packages as a whole you can also do it for individual modules but
like so what it does is it uses imports as the proxy for a dependency so it will statically
analyze all of the imports in your module and then it will build a directed graph
so you can then think of your module think of your package as like every module is a node in a graph
with um arrows pointing between all of them and the arrows are the imports um sometimes you call
them edges or whatever um uh and and then what important inter allows you to do is to write
contracts that are just in yaml or toml um which just say all right these these are the rules i
want you to check um when you run the linter and it will then um you know you can put it in ci or
fail if someone adds an import the wrong way and i i found it's it's fascinating to see like if you
have an idea for an architecture and then you put an import linda contract on and then discover all
the places where you're breaking it they're almost always quite interesting interesting things and
And you're like, yeah, actually, this is a bit of a problem.
And it needs to be able to untangle it.
It is genuinely some conceptual tangling
that would simplify things if we didn't do it.
Yeah, it's kind of a higher order code smell.
People are familiar with this idea from refactoring a code smell.
It's not wrong in that it won't run,
but you kind of turn your nose up at it.
You go, oh, right?
And this is that, but not at a,
oh, it takes too many parameters,
but like, why is it all tied together like this?
Can we think about it better, right?
You know, and you can do things like say
all of these modules are independent,
so they don't import anything from each other.
I mean, this is like just my whole mentality
for architecting Python packages,
and I find it works really well.
And I think the fact that we've got these rules in place
is probably a big reason why we're still able
to have a thousand prs a week all happening in different time zones without that many faults
because we've got we've we've architected it so say we know that there aren't any imports between
say two energy companies or between two territories you've got to install your competitors
version as well to use yours yeah exactly so so it's um you know it's giving us it's allowing us to
think about things as being more independent and so like someone can make a change in say
Spain and it's not going to break something in Australia because you're pretty confident
because they aren't importing anything from there does that mean in theory if you got this
that you could use this within for example CI to only run unit tests on systems that have changed
or direct descendants of that package because we do do that because we've got a lot of money on ci
um and so we've had to invest a lot of money to like figure out how do we narrow down the tests
um so yeah wild yeah that's awesome that's a great observation and and actually um yeah this
this is all based on a an underlying library called grimp which is i kind of broke the libraries up
it's a little bit like what what you did samuel with pydantic and pyodantic core so import linter
is pure python um yeah but it has a dependency which is a grip which is grimp which is i mean
it's got python and rust in at the moment um but that is just a python api for building a graph
and then you can explore the graph and you can do things like it's really quite a useful tool if
if you're just interested to know something about code base,
you know, you can just type in,
build me a graph of this package, say,
and then you could say,
tell me all of the downstream modules of this module,
and then we'll explore the whole graph
and like give you a set of modules,
or tell me all the upstream modules of this.
So you can tell what dependencies are,
or you can like do, you know,
what's the shortest path between this module
module um that makes a lot of sense yep yeah can you get it to do dependencies
think the things you pip install oh i see what you mean well um you can build the graph with
multiple packages um but like i don't even know if that's really is that possible can you have two
installable pi pi packages that depend on no i'm more i'm more wondering if i can use this to
visualize well what parts of my app so i i know that i have this dependency and i have to have
it to run but what parts of my app are using that library so if i wanted to change it or whatever
you know what i mean because you can you can build a tree from there's a package for it or uv will
give you a tree of dependencies but that is based on what packages require what other packages to
be installed it doesn't actually say what's being imported from where so if you have an issue with
url lib3 what is the actual like graph of where url in three is being imported rather than what
packages depend on it uh there's a there's a flag when you build the graph which is uh include
external packages yeah and if you pass it then it will include them but it doesn't include them
it just like includes the root name um if you wanted the whole thing then you'd say build me
the graph of i mean that would work as well but you could say build me the graph of django and
kraken whatever yeah or you could say build me the graph of kraken with external packages and then
then you just see like django would just be a node in the graph but it would just be one node
yeah that'd be great does that make sense yeah so the story is this was working but slow yes so um
yeah like just as an example one of our contracts we had lots of contracts
one contract was taking six minutes to check um the reason for this is because actually
it is quite algorithmically expensive to check whether or not certain rules are being followed
because it does it's not like just doing a kind of search it's actually looking for indirect imports
so it kind of needs to explore the whole graph to see it's like a pathfinding algorithm to sort
see oh well do you end up here via this other thing that you didn't ask about um and yeah so
certain things were taking a really long time and that was costing us money because we run this you
know hundreds if not thousands of times a day um and it all adds up it also just slows down you
know your pull request you want to get the green quicker um so i had heard that rust was interoperable
with python i didn't really know anything about it um and i found this library called pi03 which is
a rust library and it makes it i'm not going to say easy but it makes it easier it makes it
surprisingly easy to um to write rust extension modules it gives you sort of all the tooling in
place and i would say you know you're writing a lot less code than you would be if you're writing
a c extension module because it's sort of a nice there's a really nice api for uh creating these
interoperable um uh compiled modules so like i started by just finding um finding the function
that was taking all the time and had millions and millions and millions of calls and i was like why
didn't i just write that as in rust and i kind of just sort of almost copied and pasted it over and
like cobbled together some pretty rubbish rust that did basically exactly the same
and uh it was a thousand times slower well done well done but but there's a good reason for that
which is i just zoomed in too close so because that because that function was called a lot of times
there is actually a cost in in crossing the boundary so i just had to step one level up and
like wrap all of those calls for that function in rust instead so there's only one call from python
to rust and then suddenly right majorly quicker i mean i think that that particular problematic
contract went from about six minutes to one minute now that is to be honest and that was brilliant
but that is not that's just scratching the surface of how much quicker it could get um but still
a six times speed up for relatively little work and basically just writing the same algorithm but
with some curly brackets um and a bit of head scratching like yeah um i was able to deliver
something without having ever done anything in rust and it was and it really made a difference you
know and saved us lots of money um yeah yeah so that was a that was and now you're a rust developer
as well now i'm a rust developer and i read for it and i'm you know i want to move more more of
grim into rust um another example even less work was um we had a problem with uh translations so
um there's a kind of standard for doing translations called fluent and some of the listeners may come
across it um and there are libraries for it in all sorts different languages including python and rust
and we realized that it was responsible for almost all of the bootstrap time of our application in
production uh was loading and scanning these translation files and um you know it was pretty
problematic it was it was like really spiky as well and you can see sometimes it would spike to like
nine minutes yeah and we knew it was all in this translations thing and someone pointed out look
there's a rust library for this so all we need to do is just link them up and so they it wasn't it
It wasn't actually me, but they just wrote this PIO3 crate.
A crate is like a Rust library.
You know, probably only about 10, 15 lines of code
just glued the two things together.
And it was really, like, not very much work.
And compile that, and it just completely sorted the problem out.
We went from eight minutes to 30 seconds.
And, you know, of that, like the, you know, that 30 seconds is other stuff.
You know, I think it's from being something that took several minutes to being virtually instant.
Crazy.
But really hardly any work.
And I think that that's a really good example of where, as Python developers, we should be aware this is an option.
if something's something slow you might just i mean rust has so many good libraries you might
just be able to like to glue it up and job done yeah yeah um one thing i would add the overhead
of calling into pyre 3 has has dropped a lot i don't know how long ago that was you you were
trying but i think it's um yeah reduced significantly so i mean i i did this quite a lot of the same
work in Pynastic Core to avoid the overhead of calling into and out of it lots of times and
I think that's less of a thing now than it used to be that's good to hear yeah cool you know one uh
one point I want to make is I think that's really interesting David to say that hey there's this
whole equivalent of PyPI called cargo or you can get these libraries just like I mean create sorry
that you get installed with cargo that you can get all these pre-built pre-tested libraries
and maybe just put a wrapper on them and do some amazing stuff.
I just started using this web server at the Python layer called Granian.
And you're like, well, how many people are working on it?
It's got up to 3,000 stars now.
Is that enough to trust?
But if you really look at it, it's really using just Hyper.
And Hyper is a library that has got 14,000 GitHub stars, 400 contributors.
And like, oh, you know, it's kind of this cool application is something of a wrapper around this really popular and well-known thing.
I think we'll see more of this kind of stuff.
Absolutely.
And Giovanni, who works on this, is also working on Rloop,
basically an alternative to UVloop in Rust.
I don't know if that's in here as well.
I maintain watch files, which is the file watching library
used by uvicorn and some other things.
And that is, again, wrapping a Rust library
for getting fast system notifications.
And also rtoml, which is the fastest Toml parser in Python,
which is, again, just wrapping the Rust library.
So there are a number of places
where you can get enormous performance improvements
and indeed fundamentally more reliable libraries
because you're building in Rust
when you're doing complex, particularly multi-threaded things
by relying on Rust.
These libraries seem to be very good quality
and well thought through.
That's been my experience.
Somehow it attracts people that are very thorough
because you can't really program in Rust unless you're thorough
because you can't get it to compile.
I think it's hard to say Rust does have a bit of a problem
with abandoned libraries.
I think if we didn't call it out, I know David, you and I were speaking
at an event where there was one particular chap who had a bee
in his bonnet about that exact issue.
I think he was slightly overblown on it, but there is definitely an issue
with some abandoned libraries in Rust.
like uh i mean same is true in python in its own place but um but you're right there are also
libraries that are abandoned and remaining incredibly good quality so jitter uses a library for
parsing floats i didn't know this but the complexity of parsing floats from strings is a
entire subject of academic interest there are eight different algorithms for doing it with
different performance depending on whether or not it is the structure of the float and there's a
a library that does this very well and the library was abandoned but it worked perfectly and eventually
the guy replied to my email and went and fixed it so i mean the quality yeah the um the
quality is very high in my experience yeah i just make the point i think you know there's over half
million packages in pypi as well and i'm sure there's a non-trivial amount of them that people
are no longer maintaining as well sometimes things are done and sometimes they're abandoned and it's
It's hard to tell the difference.
Like, no, I haven't updated it in two years because it's done.
But also--
Yeah.
Also.
OK.
It's hard to tell the difference until you're three weeks in,
and you don't want to back out of using that library,
and you realize that actually it's--
It's actually not done.
It's not done.
But nobody wants to write.
All right, David, before we wrap this up,
I would really like to have you talk us through sort
of the tool chain workflow of I've got this idea.
I want to maybe rewrite it in Rust,
if you've spoken about it.
What are the building blocks or the moving pieces?
What do people need to know?
- Absolutely, okay.
So the things you need to know is first of all,
the thing you're gonna create is an extension module,
which is like a built compiled thing.
And that is gonna end up being a Python wheel.
And what you wanna do is you,
when you release something on PyPI,
you wanna have wheels for all the different versions
of Python and chip architectures and things.
So that's kind of like some of the complexity.
So that's kind of the end goal.
We wanna end up with these built versions of Python
that are gonna contain some Python code,
but also some compiled things for, you know,
macOS under Python 312 or whatever like that.
So the way you start this is you need to install Rust
on your computer and the tool for that
is actually called RustUp.
This kind of confused me to start with.
I didn't really understand what RustUp is,
but RustUp is kind of like one level up
and it's maybe a bit like PyPI if people have used that,
but it sort of does a bit more than that.
- Maybe also a bit like uv these days
where you can uv install Python
based on what you asked for,
or just create a virtual environment
and it'll just grab the tools you need to make that happen.
- I'd say that cargo is closer to uv probably,
which is the next thing I'll talk about.
But Rustup is like one step up
and it's like, it's for managing the versions of Rust
that are on your computer
and the versions of cargo that are on your computer,
which are, cargo is the package manager for Rust.
So what you'll do, your first step is to go
the rust website and install rust up and then hopefully at the command line you'll be able to
type rust c and then you can compile a rust file if you want to but you don't actually need to do
that because that's what you use cargo for so your main kind of thing that you're typing all the time
when you're using rust is cargo and then some kind of command um so you've installed rust up then
you've got cargo then what you'd want to do is create a project um and you can create a project
using cargo you could do cargo new and then it'll give you a whole file system structure and you'll
be able to run it and run tests and all that very nice um and that is how you would um install the
latest version of pi 03 so you you would um i probably would just go over onto um crates.io
which is the pi pi equivalent and look at what the version is of pi pi and then write it in a
I think there is a cargo command probably for adding it.
But it's also worth saying that matcher in is a big part of the ecosystem.
Do you want to introduce matcher in?
Because I think that's about where that comes in.
So cargo is the thing that Rust people will be using to compile these things.
But you can't just use that on your own because you need the whole pip installing kind of side of things.
So you can use cargo and just create an extension module.
but then you need to like give it the right name and copy it into the right place um so there's a
bit of kind of gluing that needs to happen and that is what matcher in is for why do we need two
tools um well cargo is the rust side of things but matcher in is actually just a pip installable
python package so what you'll do is in your in the python project that you want to rustify you
will do go into your activate your virtual environment or whatever and then do pip install
matcher in and then you've got this tool for matcher in and you could even do matcher in a new project
or something like that I can't remember what the command is um uh what what I had to do was I had
a pre-existing project so I couldn't just do it like that um but it might be quite a nice way to
learn is to to follow the matcher in docs to do a new project um and what matulin allows you to do
is um i think you you might edit your rust code um and then you would type matcher in develop
and then it would compile your rust code but it would it would kind of install it locally so that
can work with it and then the final piece of this picture is how that gets onto pypi
matrian also gives you some tools for that there's a there's a command called generate ci i think
which um gives you it just spits out yaml for the for whatever ci provider you want and that's
really helpful as well um yeah because i have it verbally like i've given a talk yeah well i think
I think one of the things you both have to deal with here is releasing a package, a wheel for this is not just, well, let's zip up the Python files and put them up there, right?
You're compiling native code, and that means you need variations, right?
Yeah, I think Pydantic Core releases 60-something different wheels to cover all different possible combinations of Python version and architecture.
But I mean, I think I would basically second what David was saying.
Matrim in particular does an amazing job of smoothing out
the kind of rough edges between Rust and Python.
Rust has had a good, relatively good story on package management for some time.
Python is just coming.
But often when you're trying to do these things,
it's the like trying to get one to speak to the other
and working out what the hell is going wrong
and what does that file need to be or that like sim link
between some DLL and some other place.
And so that's
up what your workflow looks like is um if if you're if you haven't changed any of the rust then you
know maybe like you run tests you just run py test whatever and that that will run tests against the
compiled bit assuming you're writing python tests against that um but if you make a change to the
rust then you do have to have an extra step of building it so you type match your in develop and
and then it would build it.
And then you could run pytest.
Or you might, and I recommend you do actually,
if you're working with Rust and you're not very experienced,
I tend to have a test suite for Python,
but also some tests in Rust
because you get a much quicker feedback loop
because you can type cargo test
and that will compile it and run the test really quite quickly.
One other thing I think it's worth adding
is that obviously if you have this binary
that contains your Rust code,
which is, you know, in the end, it becomes a module that you can import in Python.
But by default, that is obviously opaque to type checkers.
So things like IDEs and static type checking can't look inside there and see what your functions are.
So you want to write a PYI file, which contains your definitions in like stub Python code effectively.
The problem you then have is you end up with two separate definitions of what your functions have in them.
And so there's a really neat tool,
which I didn't know about until quite recently,
but we use it in Pydantic Core,
which mypy can basically type check
that the PYI file stubs match the definitions inside the DLL.
And so you can have like guarantees
that when you've written in a PYI file,
my function foobar takes A as a string
and C as a list of bytes.
That's wild.
That's really cool. I didn't know about that.
Yeah, that's awesome.
it fixes altogether.
Is that my plugin?
If you have a look at Pynantic Core,
we run it in CI or in maybe even pre-commit
so you can find it there.
I couldn't remember.
I discovered it because it,
like so often with so many of us,
I discovered it because it had a bug
and so it suddenly didn't do quite the right thing for me.
But I mean, in general, it's been perfect until now.
Yeah, it's plumbing until it doesn't work
and then it's a flood.
Bug-based discovery.
Definitely a thing we've all practiced.
But bug driven development.
Yeah.
And if people want to check out these PYI files,
there's a project called Type Shed on GitHub that whose job is to basically
become these so-called stub files for a ridiculous number of projects that,
you know, we're talking about things that are not going to get upgraded.
Maybe they're never going to get type you put on them,
but you can go and pour one of these or whatever and get it.
But also lots of packages now have their own,
Either they have types in them or they have a PYI file that defines the types,
either in the Python code or in PYI.
Yeah.
Awesome.
That's really cool.
I didn't realize about the tool there, though, that does the integration.
That's awesome.
I think, presumably, you can use it to generate your first PYI file.
Then you go in and put your doc strings in, tweak things a bit,
and then you run it in test mode.
Oh, nice.
Yeah, because that way use the true version, the Rust version,
and just say generate what I need to make this work.
That makes a lot of sense.
Yeah.
Awesome.
All right, well, gentlemen, we are just pretty much out of time.
I guess let me ask you one more thing here,
and I don't think I pulled it up, so I think it's...
Hold on, let me check my notes.
Quickly checks notes.
for where this was one sec.
There's a new PEP called external wheel hosting.
Have you all heard of this?
- I have not seen that particular,
is that for Wasm?
I know I've been talking to a hood a fair bit
about the challenges of uploading Wasm wheels.
- No, it has to do with more than it is five.
Here we go.
Copy link.
It is 759.
And the idea that if you could--
the nomenclature here is ridiculous, as in clever.
So the idea is that each build of Pydantic
puts 60 binary artifacts onto PyPI.
And there's limitations on how large your projects can be
and how large individual releases can be.
This is especially problematic for machine learning stuff.
And so the idea is, could we create a wheel stub?
And what is a wheel stub called?
It's like the wheel without the content.
It's called a rim because wheels go on.
There's all sorts of stuff like that in here.
But it contains a hash and then a location
where the thing actually lives.
So you mentioned OpenAI, for example.
Maybe they have some huge thing they want you to download eventually.
They could host it and you just publish the rim, not the wheel.
Do you know the story of why they're called wheels?
This entertains me a lot.
No, tell me.
So they're called wheels because you have wheels of cheese.
They're called wheels of cheese because the original PyPI was called the cheese shop,
which in turn was called the cheese shop because there is a Monty Python sketch
called the cheese shop where he goes in to buy cheese and then none of the cheeses he asked for
are available and it was called that as a way of taking the piss out of i forget which other
language it might have been ruby or php how their original uh package registry have no packages in
it like the cheese shops get in monty python and that has oh my gosh assisted to rims in 2024
That's incredible. Yeah, I did know the cheese shop equivalent there, that that was part of it,
but I didn't realize that it was the wheels of cheese. Okay, incredible. There's a lot of Monty
Python. You look around everywhere, the logo is the snake, right? But the logo, the name is not
Python the snake. It's Monty Python. I know. I mean, I always think if I wrote a book about
python i'd want to have the knights who say meh in the front yes i want the bunny the killer bunny
it's definitely a certain era of humor i i don't know you know it definitely dates python in its
way and us perhaps i fear um yeah perhaps perhaps i don't know what this gray hair is about but
we're gonna go all right guys how let's let's close this out i'll give each of you a chance
to just give us sort of a parting thought
on integrating Rust and maybe thoughts
and just Rust and Python together?
I'll go, David.
Only really to say I am a better programmer
for having learned to write Rust as well as Python.
And I fail to see the value in C anymore for new projects.
I get why it exists for lots of existing ones.
I'm not going to get into the issue
of whether stuff should be rewritten in Rust.
But I think if you're starting from scratch
and you're trying to write something high performance,
The experience of doing it in Rust is completely different
from trying to do it in C or C++ or C#
or any of the other, or Fortran or Julia
or any of those other languages.
Rust is awesome, so I'd really encourage people
to give it a go.
When you're giving it a go,
you might also give Logfire a quick go.
We're releasing our Rust SDK fairly soon.
We have Python already,
so we're matching the Python Rust TypeScript ecosystem,
which I think is the stack to build with today.
Awesome.
um i think my my parting thought would be like if you give it a go don't be surprised if you feel
quite inadequate it's really quite hard um uh to sort of get your head around what's going on um
and i feel very much still at the beginning of my journey but i but nevertheless i have actually
managed to like deliver some stuff which is valuable even though to be honest i'm not like
particularly proud of the code i'm writing it's like you know i'm a beginner again um and i just
want to say like don't let that put you off um and if you're confused you know just keep on
keep on going and trying to get your head around it will make you a better programmer the book that
I've found the best for learning Rust is the Rust programming language, which is a free book
on the Rust website. Right. Just click the learn button in the top, right? Yeah. Learn menu item.
Yeah. Awesome. Yeah. I'll also just add one quick thought as well to just follow up to what you
said, David, is whenever you're switching programming languages and you've been programming
for a while, you just, you feel inadequate and you feel like I was so good. I had it figured out.
I could just sit down and do stuff.
And now even how do I just read a file or just run a program?
I'm lost all over again.
But every time you do that, your prior experience still carries over way more than it initially feels like it does.
And you're not throwing everything away and starting over.
You're learning a neutral chain and then on you go.
Absolutely.
And particularly when it's so easy to call Python from Rust and vice versa.
and so you can build applications
that are like hybrid of the two.
Absolutely, yeah.
Well, congratulations both on some awesome projects
and yeah, thanks.
Thanks for being here.
Bye, y'all.
Thank you so much.
Bye.